>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, MARCH 15:
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY
HEADS TO SWITZERLAND TO MEET
WITH IRAN'S FOREIGN MINISTER.
ALSO, HOW CIA MONEY ENDED UP IN
THE HANDS OF AL QAEDA.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
ONE MAN'S EFFORT TO BUILD THE
FIRST PLANNED PALESTINIAN CITY.
>> IF WE THE PALESTINIANS DON'T
TAKE RISKS THEN WHO'S GOING TO
DO THAT AND OUR NATION WILL
NEVER BE BUILT.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
IN LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
WE START WITH NEWS OF AN
UNPRECEDENTED DIPLOMATIC MOVE:
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY
SAYS THE U.S. AND ITS ALLIES
WILL HAVE TO NEGOTIATE WITH
PRESIDENT BASHAR AL-ASSAD TO END
THE CONFLICT IN SYRIA.
>> WE'RE GOING TO HAVE TO MAKE
IT CLEAR TO HIM THAT THERE IS A
DETERMINATION BY EVERYBODY TO
SEEK THAT POLITICAL OUTCOME AND
CHANGE HIS CALCULATION ABOUT
NEGOTIATING.
THAT'S UNDERWAY RIGHT NOW.
>> Sreenivasan: UP UNTIL NOW,
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION HAS
SAID ASSAD NEEDED TO STEP DOWN
INSTEAD OF JOINING IN
NEGOTIATIONS.
MORE THAN 200,000 PEOPLE HAVE
DIED DURING THE CONFLICT WHICH
ENTERS ITS 5TH YEAR TODAY.
SECRETARY KERRY ALSO SAID TODAY
HE HOPES TO REACH THE FRAMEWORK
OF A NUCLEAR ARMS DEAL WITH IRAN
BY THE END OF MARCH.
SENATE MAJORITY LEADER MITCH
MCCONNELL SAYS HE'S, QUOTE,
ALARMED ABOUT THE CURRENT PLAN.
>> THE PRESIDENT IS ABOUT TO
MAKE, WHAT WE BELIEVE WILL BE A
VERY BAD DEAL.
HE CLEARLY DOESN'T WANT CONGRESS
INVOLVED IN IT, AT ALL, AND
WE'RE WORRIED ABOUT IT.
WE DON'T THINK HE OUGHT TO MAKE
A BAD DEAL WITH ONE OF THE WORST
REGIMES IN THE WORLD.
>> Sreenivasan: THE WALL STREET
JOURNAL'S CAROL LEE JOINS US NOW
FROM WASHINGTON.
>> SO LET'S START TALKING FIRST
ABOUT THE 47 SENATORS WHO WROTE
A LETTER TO IRAN AND WHAT THAT
DID TO THIS NEGOTIATION PROCESS.
>> WELL, IF ANYTHING IT CREATED
A POLITICAL FIRESTORM IN THE
U.S.
I THINK WE DON'T YET KNOW
EXACTLY THE IMPACT IT IS GOING
TO HAVE ON NEGOTIATIONS THIS
WEEK, WHICH STARTS SUNDAY NIGHT
BUT IT CERTAINLY REALLY ANGERED
THE WHITE HOUSE WHICH FELT LIKE
THE LETTER WAS DESIGNED FOR NO
OTHER INTENTION THAN TO UNDERCUT
THE PRESIDENT ON HIS CHIEF
FOREIGN POLICY INITIATIVE OF A
THE SECOND TERM AND TWO TRACKS
THAT IT COULD GO DOWN IN TERMS
OF OUTCOME.
FALLOUT FROM IT, AND ONE COULD
BENEFIT THE WHITE HOUSE AND THAT
IS THAT IT SEEMS TO MAKE
DEMOCRATS WHO WERE ALIGNING WITH
REPUBLICANS IN SOME LEGISLATION
THAT THE WHITE HOUSE OPPOSES
REGARDING IRAN IT IS GOING TO
GIVE THEM PAUSE AS TO WHETHER
THEY ARE GOING TO CONTINUE TO
SUPPORT THAT LEGISLATION OR AT
THE VERY LEAST THERE ARE BILLS
THE PRESIDENT HAS SAID HE WOULD
VETO, ONE OF THE THINGS
REPUBLICANS ARE TRYING TO DO IS
GET A MAJOR APPROVED MAJORITY IN
THE SENATE BECAUSE THE DEMOCRATS
INTERPRETED IT AS SO PARTISAN
MAY HAVE A BENEFIT FOR THE WHITE
HOUSE OF THE REPUBLICANS NOT
BEING ABLE TO ACHIEVE, BE AN
APPROVED MAJORITY.
AND THE SECOND THING THIS DID IS
CREATE THE SITUATION THERE THAT
THE THEY HAD CONCERNS IN THE
WHITE HOUSE IF IRAN WALKS AWAY
FROM THE TALKS IT IS VERY
IMPORTANT THAT IRAN BE TO BE
BLAMED FOR THAT AND IRAN OWNS
THAT, AND IF THE TALKS FAIL A
AND THEY CAN BLAME THE U.S. THAT
IS A REAL CONCERN.
>> SO THE WHITE HOUSE SENT A
LETTER OF ITS OWN BACK LAST
NIGHT.
WHAT DID THAT SAY?
>> THIS IS A LETTER FROM THE
PRESIDENT'S CHIEF OF STAFF,
DENIS MCDONOUGH TO SENATOR ROB
CORKER, THE ON THE FOREIGN,
FOREIGN RELATIONS COMMITTEE AND
IT STAYS WE DON'T SUPPORT YOUR
BILL WHICH IS WIDELY KNOWN,
SENATOR CORKER HAS A BILL THAT
WOULD ESSENTIALLY GIVE CONGRESS
AN UP OR DOWN VOTE OR WHETHER IT
COULD APPROVE OR REJECT ANY
FINAL DEAL AND THE WHITE HOUSE
SAID THE PRESIDENT WOULD VETO
THAT.
THEY DON'T LIKE IT, THEY DON'T
THINK THIS IS THE KIND OF
AGREEMENT THAT REQUIRES SENATE
RATIFICATION, AND SO DENIS
MCDONOUGH SENT A LETTER TO
CORKER AND SAID THEY DON'T
OPPOSE THIS IN FACT HE STARTED
TO MAKE THE ARGUMENT YOU ARE
LIKELY TO HEAR MORE OF, HIS
ARGUMENT WAS THAT CONGRESS WILL
GET A VOTE ON THIS.
THEY DON'T GET A VOTE ON WHETHER
OR NOT TO APPROVE A DEAL OR DENY
A DEAL BUT THEY WILL GET A VOTE
IN TERMS OF, AND THEY WILL HAVE
THEIR SAY IN TERMS OF HAVING TO
LIFT SANCTIONS BECAUSE THEY
CAN'T -- THE U.S. -- CAN
PRESIDENT CANNOT UNILATERALLY
LIFT ALL OF THE SANCTIONS,
PARTICULARLY SOME OF THE MOST
INTENSE ONES AND THAT REQUIRES
AN ACT OF CONGRESS.
>> SO HOW DOES THIS PLAY OUT
OVER THE NEXT WEEK?
>> WELL, AS THEY GET CLOSER AND
THE ADMINISTRATION FEELS THAT
THEY ARE CLOSER THAN THEY HAVE
EVER BEEN TO A DEAL, THERE IS
PRETTY MUCH A BROAD BELIEF THEY
WILL MEET THIS DEADLINE BY THE
END OF MARCH, BUT AT THE SAME
TIME THE POLITICAL THEATRE AND
OUTCRY IN THE U.S. IS REALLY
STEPPING UP, AND SO IT REMAINS
TO BE SEEN HOW EXACTLY THIS WILL
PLAY OUT, BUT I THINK IT ALSO
REMAINS TO BE SEEN THAT IRAN
RESPONDS TO, AND YOU WILL SEE
THAT IN THE NEXT COMING DAYS
WHAT THEIR POSTURE IS IN THIS
ROUND OF NEGOTIATIONS.
>> ALL RIGHT, CAROL LEE OF THE
WALL STREET JOURNAL, THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> YOU CAN READ THE LETTER WHITE
HOUSE CENTER SENATOR CORKER AT
AT OUR WEBSITE.
>> Sreenivasan: FERGUSON
SHOOTING ARRESTS
INVESTIGATORS HAVE MADE AN
ARREST IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SHOOTING OF TWO OFFICERS IN
FERGUSON, MISSOURI.
20-YEAR OLD JEFFREY WILLIAMS IS
CHARGED WITH TWO COUNTS OF FIRST
DEGREE ASSAULT, DISCHARGING A
WEAPON, AND ARMED CRIMINAL
ACTION.
ST. LOUIS COUNTY PROSECUTOR BOB
MCCULLOCH SAYS WILLIAMS
ACKNOWLEDGED HE FIRED SHOTS AS
THE PROTEST OUTSIDE THE POLICE
STATION WAS BREAKING UP EARLY
THURSDAY.
WILLIAMS TOLD AUTHORITIES HE WAS
NOT TRYING TO TARGET THE
OFFICERS, BUT WAS INVOLVED IN AN
UNRELATED DISPUTE.
WILLIAMS WAS ALREADY WANTED FOR
VIOLATING PROBATION.
THE PROSECUTOR THANKED THE
PUBLIC FOR PROVIDING INFORMATION
LEADING TO THE ARREST, AND ASKED
FOR MORE AS THE INVESTIGATION
CONTINUES.
>> THE INVESTIGATION IS ONGOING.
THE POLICE AT THIS POINT TOOK
INFORMATION PROVIDED TO THEM BY
MEMBERS OF THEM COMMUNITY, AND I
CANNOT STRESS HOW IMPORTANT THAT
IS IN EVERY CASE, AND IN THIS
CASE IT HAS BEEN INVALUABLE.
>> Sreenivasan: THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION HAS REPORTEDLY
ABANDONED PLANS TO PULL
THOUSANDS OF TROOPS OUT OF
AFGHANISTAN BY THE END OF THE
YEAR.
THE U.S. HAD PLANNED TO REDUCE
THE NUMBER OF TROOPS TO 5,500 BY
2016.
HOWEVER, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
REPORTS THAT MILITARY LEADERS
WANT TO KEEP MORE TROOPS ON THE
GROUND TO HELP FIGHT THE LAST
REMNANTS OF AL-QAIDA AND MONITOR
ISIS.
THE WHITE HOUSE IS EXPECTED TO
ANNOUNCE THE SLOWER WITHDRAWAL
TIMELINE LATER THIS MONTH.
THE PAKISTANI TALIBAN IS
CLAIMING RESPONSIBILITY FOR A
PAIR OF DEADLY EXPLOSIONS
TARGETING TWO CHRISTIAN CHURCHES
THIS MORNING.
THE TWIN BLASTS IN LAHORE KILLED
AT LEAST 14 PEOPLE AND WOUNDED
70 OTHERS.
THE DEATH TOLL IS EXPECTED TO
RISE.
MILITANT LEADERS SAY THE ATTACKS
WILL CONTINUE UNTIL THERE IS A
QUOTE, "ISLAMIC SYSTEM" IN
PAKISTAN.
THREE BRITISH TEENS HAVE BEEN
ARRESTED IN TURKEY, THE BOYS
ARE SUSPECTED OF TRYING TO GET
TO SYRIA TO JOIN MILITANTS
THERE.
THE TWO 17-YEAR OLDS AND A 19-
YEAR OLD HAVE BEEN SENT BACK TO
THE U.K. ON SUSPICION OF"
PREPARATION OF TERRORIST ACTS."
LONDON POLICE SAY THREE BRITISH
SCHOOL GIRLS SUCCEEDED IN
GETTING TO SYRIA TO JOIN THE
CONFLICT LAST MONTH.
BRITISH POLICE SAY SOCIAL MEDIA
IS ALLOWING TEENS TO COMMUNICATE
DIRECTLY WITH EXTREMISTS.
POLICE ESTIMATE ROUGHLY 700
BRITONS HAVE TRAVELED TO SYRIA
AND MAY RETURN TO THE U.K. TO
CARRY OUT TERRORIST ATTACKS AT
HOME.
IN PARIS, THE KOSHER MARKET THAT
WAS THE SITE OF A TERRORIST
ATTACK IN JANUARY REOPENED ITS
DOORS TO SHOPPERS THIS MORNING.
AN ISLAMIC MILITANT KILLED FOUR
PEOPLE INSIDE THE JEWISH MARKET
JUST DAYS AFTER THE DEADLY
ASSAULT ON THE OFFICES OF THE
SATIRICAL MAGAZINE "CHARLIE
HEBDO."
THE SHOP REOPENED TODAY WITH AN
ENTIRELY NEW STAFF.
THE WORKERS WHO SURVIVED THE
ATTACK ARE STILL RECOVERING.
TONIGHT, WE'RE SEEING THE FIRST
IMAGES OF THE DESTRUCTION CAUSED
BY CYCLONE PAM.
ITN'S RICHARD PALLOT HAS MORE
FROM VANUATU.
>> ONE OF THE MOST INTENSE
STORMS EVER RECORDED IN THE
SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE, THE
DESTRUCTION TO MATCH.
DOZENS ARE FEARED DEZ DEAD THIS
IS ONE OF THE MAIN ROADS INTO
VANUATU'S CAPITAL, WHERE
90 PERCENT OF ALL HOUSES HERE
ARE THOUGHT TO HAVE BEEN
DESTROYED.
>> ONE OF THE HOUSES WAS BLOWN
OUT, EVERYBODY ELSE --
>> THE AID PLANES ARE STARTING
TO ARRIVE BUT THE TRUTH IS MOST
OF THE ISLANDS IN THIS REMOTE
ARCHIPELAGO ARE STILL COMPLETELY
CUT OFF FROM ANY HELP.
>> MANY OF THE RELIEF AGENCIES
HEADING OUT FOR AUSTRALIA A AND
NEW ZEALAND ALSO ASSISTED WHEN
TYPHOON HAIYAN KILLED THOUSANDS
IN THE PHILIPPINES.
THEY FEAR SOMETHING SIMILAR.
>> IN MASSACHUSETTS TWO
>> Sreenivasan: TWO GAY AND
LESBIAN GROUPS MARCHED IN THE"
SOUTH BOSTON SAINT PATRICK'S
DAY PARADE".
IT'S THE FIRST TIME ANY GAY
RIGHTS GROUP HAS BEEN ALLOWED TO
TAKE PART SINCE THE PARADE WAS
FOUNDED MORE THAN A CENTURY AGO.
A DECADES-OLD SUPREME COURT
DECISION HAS ALLOWED PARADE
ORGANIZERS TO EXCLUDE GAY
GROUPS.
BUT THIS YEAR, ORGANIZERS AGREED
TO ALLOW BOTH A GAY VETERANS
GROUP AND BOSTON PRIDE TO JOIN
IN.
>> Sreenivasan: NOW TO THE
REVELATION REPORTED BY THE NEW
YORK TIMES: AT LEAST A MILLION
DOLLARS FROM THE C.I.A.
EVIDENTLY WOUND UP IN THE
COFFERS OF AL QAEDA IN 2010.
I'M JOINED BY NEW YORK TIMES
REPORTER MATTHEW ROSENBERG IN
WASHINGTON, D.C.
>> SO THAT MILLION WAS PART OF A
LARGER SUM.
WHERE DID THIS MONEY COME FROM
AND WHERE DID IT GO?
>> THE CIA FOR YEARS STARTING IN
2003 PROVIDED WHAT AMOUNTED TO
BASICALLY A SLUSH FUND FOR
PRESIDENT KARZAI OF AFGHANISTAN
AND HIS OFFICE, THEY USED THIS
MONEY TO PAY OFF VARIOUS WAR
LARDS ON AND OTHER PEOPLE TO
KEEP ON OUR SIDE AND THINGS THAT
THEY DIDN'T WANT TO DO ON THE
BOOKS, SO A FEW YEARS EARLIER,
IN 2008, AN AFGHAN DIPLOMAT HAD
BEEN KIDNAPPED, THE AFGHANS WERE
NEGOTIATING A RANSOM TO GET HIM
BACK, FINALLY A PRICE WAS
SETTLED OF $5 MILLION, AND THEY
NEEDED $5 MILLION IN CASH, SO
THEY WENT TO A SLUSH FUND THEY
HAD AND THEY HAD ABOUT A MILLION
THERE THEY PUT ASIDE AND TOOK
THAT, THE REST OF THE 4 MILLION
THEY GOT FROM IRAN AND PAKISTAN
AND SOME OF THE GULF STATES THAT
HELPED THEM OUT WITH CASH, AND
IT ALL ENDED UP WITH AL QAEDA.
>> AND WHEN YOU SAY CASH, YOU
MEAN ACTUAL DOLLAR BILLS IN BAGS
DROPPED OFF AT THE PALACE?
>> YES.
EVERY MONTH THEY WOULD GO THERE
WITH SUIT CASES, BACKPACKS,
SOMETIMES EVEN PLASTIC SHOPPING
BAGS, AS IF THEY WERE COMING
FROM SAFE WAY AND WOULD DROP OFF
THE CASH FROM A FEW HUNDRED
THOUSANDS OR MAYBE A FEW MILLION
AT TIMES AND WENT TO A VARIETY
OF PURPOSES.
>> AND SO HOW DO WE KNOW THAT AL
QAEDA ACTUALLY GOT SOME OF THOSE
DOLLARS?
>> WE KNOW BECAUSE WHEN THE NAVY
NAVY, NAVY SEALS KILLED OBAMA,
ON ON THEY SEIZED COMPUTERS AND
DOCUMENTS FROM HIS COMPOUND AND
A SERIES OF LETTERS BETWEEN BIN
LADEN AND ONE OF HIS CHIEF
LIEUTENANTS WAS INTRODUCED AT
TRIAL LAST WEEK, A TRIAL LAST
MONTH IN NEW YORK, AND WE TOOK A
LOOK AT THESE LETTERS AND IN
THESE LETTERS BIN BEN AND ONE OF
HIS LIEUTENANTS ARE DISCUSSING
GETTING A RANSOM AND BUYING
WEAPONS WITH IT AND THEN ALL
KINDS OF WEIRD CONCERNS, BIN
LADEN IS WANTING HIM TO BE
CAREFUL WITH THE AMERICANS, THEY
COULD BE TRACKING THIS AND MAYBE
PUT RADIATION OR SOME SUBSTANCE
ON IT AND HE ACTUALLY SEEMS MUCH
MORE CONCERNED, IT SEEMS TO GIVE
AMERICANS A LOT MORE CREDIT FOR
TRACKING THEIR SPENDING THAN HAS
EVER BEEN IN THE CASE IN IRAQ OR
AFGHANISTAN.
>> SO-SO THOSE LETTERS ALSO
POINT OUT THAT THESE FUNDS WERE
GOING TO BE USED TO BUY WEAPONS
FOR THEIR FIGHT?
>> YES.
THEY WERE GOING TO HELP SUPPORT
PEOPLE WHOSE FAMILIES, FIGHTERS
WERE IN PRISON, HELP SUPPORT
THEIR FAMILIES, SOME WAS GOING
TO BE PUT AN SIDE FOR A RAINY
DAY AND WE HAVE TO UNDERSTAND
THIS CASH DELIVERY CAME, THIS
INFUSION OF CASH TO AL QAEDA
CAME AT A CRUCIAL MOMENT, IN
KIND OF 2010, THE DRONES FROM
PAKISTAN AND THE HIDEOUTS IN
PAKISTAN DESIGNATED THE RANKS OF
THE ORGANIZATION, THEY WERE
HAVING TROUBLE RAISING MONEY, I
DON'T WANT TO SAY THIS HELPED TO
REINVIGORATE THEM BUT HELPED
THEM GET BACK ON THEIR FEET AND
PART OF A BIGGER PICTURE IT
HELPED THEM SURVIVE AND EVEN BIN
LADEN THE THREAT TODAY, IT IS
NOT COMING AFTER US BUT THEY
HAVE NOT BEEN DEFEATED OR
COMPLETELY DISSIPATED.
>> AND WHEN THESE DOLLARS FROM
THE CIA MADE IT INTO THE HANDS
OF AL QAEDA, OTHER GROUPS HEARD
ABOUT THIS AND KIND OF STUCK
THEIR HAND OUT AS WELL?
>> YEAH.
I WANT TO BE CAREFUL NOT TO BE
TOO GLIB ABOUT THIS BUT THERE IS
A SENSE IN THE LETTERS OF SOME
GUY FROM THE NEIGHBORHOOD IS
RICH AND EVERYBODY ELSE WANTS A
HANDOUT TO HELP THEM OUT, ONE OF
THE LIEUTENANTS IS QUOTED ALL OF
THE OTHER GROUPS HAVE HEARD
ABOUT THIS AND THEY ALL WANT
MONEY, MAY GOD HELP US, WASN'T
THE EXACT QUOTE, CERTAIN PEOPLE
SEEMED A LITTLE CAPACITY PLATED
BY IT.
>> ALL RIGHT, MATTHEW ROSENBERG
OF "THE NEW YORK TIMES" JOINING
US FROM WASHINGTON, D.C., THANKS
SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>>
>> Sreenivasan: AS MANY PUBLIC
TELEVISION STATIONS TAKE SOME
TIME TO ASK YOU FOR YOUR
SUPPORT, WE ARE TAKING SOME TIME
TO UPDATE YOU ON SOME OF OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENTS.
TONIGHT, WE RETURN TO THE MIDDLE
EAST, SPECIFICALLY, THE WEST
BANK WHERE A MAN WITH A GRAND
PLAN AND A VERY OPTIMISTIC
VISION IS BUILDING A NEW
PALESTINIAN CITY.
BUT HE HAS DESIGNS ON SOMETHING
MUCH BIGGER: PEACE IN THE
REGION.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
MARTIN FLETCHER UPDATED THIS
REPORT WE FIRST BROADCAST IN
2013.
>> PALESTINIANS TELL ME THAT THE
HAIR ON THEIR ARM STANDS WHEN
THEY SEE THE FLAG COMING FROM
THE BOTTOM AND THEY SEE IT ON
TOP OF THE HILL.
>> Reporter: YOU CAN HARDLY MISS
IT, A THOUSAND FEET OF
PALESTINIAN PRIDE.
AMONG THE DRY WEST BANK HILLS
ABOUT 20 MILES FROM JERUSALEM,
BASHAR MASRI IS FED UP WAITING
FOR THE POLITICIANS TO BUILD A
PALESTINIAN STATE.
>> WE ARE IN A HURRY.
I AM IN A HURRY.
>> Reporter: SO THIS 52-YEAR-OLD
PALESTINIAN-AMERICAN BUSINESSMAN
IS BUILDING THE FIRST PLANNED
PALESTINIAN CITY.
>> AND I KNOW MOST OF MY PEOPLE
ARE IN A HURRY.
WE WOULD LOVE TO SEE A GREAT
NATION FOR OUR KIDS AND
GRANDCHILDREN, BUT WE ALSO WANT
TO SEE IT FOR OURSELVES.
>> Reporter: MASRI HAS RAISED A
BILLION DOLLARS TO FUND THE
BIGGEST PRIVATE INVESTMENT IN
PALESTINIAN HISTORY.
THAT'S ONE BIG GAMBLE FOR YOU.
>> IT IS A LARGE GAMBLE,
DEFINITELY.
HOWEVER, IF WE THE PALESTINIANS
DON'T TAKE RISKS THEN WHO'S
GOING TO DO THAT AND OUR NATION
WILL NEVER BE BUILT.
>> Reporter: THE MESSAGE: GET ON
WITH IT.
MASRI'S CITY IS BECOMING A FACT.
RAWABI, IT MEANS "THE HILLS,"
SOME 40,000 PALESTINIANS WILL
LIVE HERE.
HOMES HERE COST BETWEEN $60,000
AND $180,000.
YOU CAN EVEN GET A MORTGAGE,
ONCE UNHEARD OF IN THESE PARTS.
THE FIRST TWO SECTIONS, SOME 650
APARTMENTS, ARE ALMOST SOLD OUT.
>> THERE'S THREE MOVIE THEATERS.
MUSEUM.
A LIBRARY.
THERE'S A HOTEL.
THERE'S A CONVENTION CENTER.
THIS IS NABLUS GATE.
THE ONE TO THE WEST IS JAFFA
GATE.
THE ONE ON THE OTHER SIDE IS
GAZA GATE, THEN JERUSALEM GATE.
>> Reporter: THERE'S NO TEL AVIV
GATE?
>> NO, JAFFA'S CLOSE ENOUGH.
OKAY?
>> Reporter: IT'S ALL POLITICAL
SYMBOLISM.
THIS IS A PALESTINIAN FAMILY,
HOLDING HANDS, UNITED TO PROTECT
THE PALESTINIAN FLAG.
IT SYMBOLIZES THEIR FUTURE.
AND IT'S EVERYWHERE, ON TRUCKS,
CRANES.
SENDING A MESSAGE TO THE WORLD.
AND THE JEWISH SETTLEMENT OF
ATERET, ABOUT A QUARTER MILE
ACROSS THE VALLEY, ON LAND THE
PALESTINIANS CALL THEIR OWN.
THE SETTLERS HERE HAVE MIXED
FEELINGS ABOUT THEIR NEW
NEIGHBORS.
>> I HOPE THEY'LL HAVE THIS GOOD
CITY AND THEY'LL BE, THEY'LL
LIVE HAPPILY, SO MAYBE THEY
WON'T BE SO ANTI- AND SO ANGRY.
AND MAYBE THEY'LL ALSO LIVE IN
PEACE WITH US.
THAT'S WHAT I HOPE FOR AND I
PRAY FOR.
BUT I THINK THAT WE ALSO SHOULD
LIKE LIVE HERE WITHOUT ANY FEAR.
>> Reporter: RAWABI SITS IN
AREAS FULLY OR PARTIALLY UNDER
PALESTINIAN CONTROL.
IT IS SURROUNDED BY LAND FULLY
CONTROLLED BY ISRAEL, WHERE MANY
OF THE RESOURCES COME FROM, LIKE
WATER.
>> Reporter: AT THE MOMENT,
YOU'RE EXPECTING PEOPLE TO MOVE
IN MAYBE EARLY NEXT YEAR.
WHEN THEY TURN THE TAP ON IN
THEIR APARTMENT WILL THERE BE
WATER?
>> WE'RE WORKING HARD TO MAKE
SURE THEY HAVE WATER.
IF WE DO NOT, THAT WILL DELAY
THE PROJECT OBVIOUSLY.
>> Reporter: SO FAR, NO
PERMISSION FROM ISRAEL TO PIPE
IN ENOUGH WATER.
ANOTHER PROBLEM, ROADS.
THIS IS THE ONLY ACCESS TO
RAWABI, A NARROW TWO-LANE ROAD
SUITABLE FOR A TOWN OF 5,000,
NOT 40,000.
SO FAR, NO PERMISSION FROM
ISRAEL TO WIDEN IT MORE, OR FOR
MORE ACCESS ROADS.
IN TIMES OF TROUBLE, ISRAEL
COULD CLOSE IT WITH A HANDFUL OF
SOLDIERS.
NO ROAD IN, OR OUT.
>> THE ROAD ISSUE IS A BIG
PROBLEM.
WE HAVE A NUMBER OF OUTSTANDING
ISSUES.
>> Reporter: THE SALES VIDEO
MAKES RAWABI LOOK FABULOUS BUT
SO FAR IT'S JUST A SHELL.
THEY NEED TO ATTRACT INDUSTRY,
SHOPKEEPERS, BUILD SCHOOLS,
CREATE FIVE THOUSAND JOBS.
YOU'D THINK THE P.A., THE
PALESTINIAN AUTHORITY, WHICH
ADMINISTERS MATTERS IN THE WEST
BANK, WOULD BACK SUCH AN
AMBITIOUS VENTURE.
BUT NOT EXACTLY.
MASRI CAREFULLY CHOOSES HIS
WORDS.
>> THEY ARE SUPPORTING.
>> Reporter: ARE THEY SUPPORTING
FINANCIALLY OR MORALLY OR WHAT?
>> MOSTLY, 99.9% MORALLY.
HARDLY FINANCIALLY.
SO WE'RE BUILDING THE PUBLIC
SCHOOLS, WE'RE PUTTING THE
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT, THE
WATER RESERVOIR, THE ACCESS ROAD
TO THE CITY, WHICH WE DID NOT
ANTICIPATE ON WHEN WE STARTED
THE PROJECT.
>> Reporter: YOU EXPECTED THE
PALESTINIAN AUTHORITY TO DO IT
AND TO PAY FOR IT?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
THAT IS THE RIGHT THING.
>> Reporter: SOME PALESTINIANS
LIKE PARLIAMENT MEMBER MUSTAFA
BARGHOUTI THINK THAT TELLING
RAWABI ONLY AS A SUCCESS STORY
OBSCURES WHAT HE SAYS IS THE
LARGER PALESTINIAN STORY OF
OCCUPATION AND OPPRESSION.
>> MY WORRY IS THAT THERE IS A
CERTAIN TREND IN CERTAIN MEDIA,
ENCOURAGED OF COURSE MAINLY BY
ISRAEL OR THOSE WHO ARE
CONNECTED TO ISRAEL, MAINLY TO
SHOW THINGS ARE FINE, THINGS ARE
OKAY.
PALESTINIANS ARE NORMALIZING AND
ACCEPTING THE SYSTEM OF
OCCUPATION, AND THEY EVEN HAVE A
NEW CITY.
THAT'S NOT, THAT'S NOT TRUE.
THIS IS NOT THE REAL STORY.
>> Reporter: UNEMPLOYMENT IN THE
PALESTINIAN TERRITORIES IS MORE
THAN 20%.
GOVERNMENT SALARIES ARE RARELY
PAID ON TIME, OR IN FULL.
YET IN RAMALLAH, THE PALESTINIAN
SEAT OF POWER ABOUT SIX MILES
FROM THE NEW PLANNED CITY-
THERE'S THIS MALL FOR THE
PALESTINIAN MIDDLE CLASS.
KENTUCKY FRIED CHICKEN.
A WELL-STOCKED GROCERY STORE.
AND TV ON A LOOP SAYING: BUY IN
RAWABI, THE CITY OF THE FUTURE.
>> THIS IS OUR FIRST TIME IN
THIS, WE BOUGHT IT WITHOUT EVEN
SEEING IT.
>> Reporter: MAHER AND ABEER ABU
MADI WERE INTRODUCED TO US BY
RAWABI STAFF.
THEY WILL LIVE HERE WITH THEIR
SEVEN CHILDREN.
THEIR 3,000-SQUARE FOOT
APARTMENT COST ABOUT $170,000,
EXPENSIVE BY LOCAL STANDARDS.
>> THIS IS ALL LIVING ROOM, FOUR
BEDROOMS, THREE SHOWERS,
BATHROOMS.
>> Reporter: HE IS A PROFESSOR,
SHE HAS A MASTER'S DEGREE AND
RAISES THEIR CHILDREN AT HOME.
FOR THEM, RAWABI IS MORE THAN
JUST A TOWN.
>> MAYBE IT'S MY DREAM WHEN I
WAS A KID TO-- TO LIVE THIS
LIFE.
SO I DID NOT MANAGE TO LIVE THIS
SO I-- I DREAM THAT MY CHILDREN
WILL GROW IN THIS LIFE.
>> Reporter: AND YOU'RE GIVING
THEM, YOU'RE FULFILLING THAT
DREAM.
>> I HOPE SO.
>> IT'S ALSO TO SHOW THE WORLD
THAT PALESTINIANS ARE NOT ONLY
ABOUT CONFLICT WITH ISRAEL. IT'S
IT'S NOT ABOUT INTIFADA AND
THROWING STONES AND TERRORISM.
IT'S NOT LIKE THAT.
IT'S ALSO THAT WE HAVE OUR KIDS.
WE ARE EDUCATED.
WE HAVE A FUTURE AND WE AIM TO
HAVE OUR INDEPENDENT STATE.
OUR STRUGGLE EXISTENCE IN THIS
LAND IS THROUGH SUCH PROJECTS.
>> Reporter: AND THAT'S EXACTLY
WHAT MASRI THINKS, TOO.
>> IT'S A SAMPLE OF THE
PALESTINIAN STATE.
AND THE PALESTINIAN STATE IS A
BIG STEP TOWARDS PEACE.
>> Reporter: WE CAME BACK AFTER
A YEAR AND A HALF TO CHECK ON
THE PROJECT.
NOW CONSTRUCTION IS GOING GREAT.
THEY SAY THIS WOULD BE THE
LARGEST AMPHITHEATER IN THE
EAST.
BUT AS FAR AS PEOPLE AND MOVING
IN IS CONCERNED, THEY'RE ONE
YEAR BEHIND SCHEDULE.
AND THE REASON IS, THERE'S NO
WATER.
THIS IS A FURNISHED SHOW
APARTMENT.
IT LOOKS GRAND AND IMPRESSIVE.
BUT STILL, NO WATER.
FOR CLOSE TO A YEAR, ISRAELI
OFFICIALS COULD NOT AGREE TO
CHANNEL WATER TO RAWABI, WHICH
SLOWED DOWN DEVELOPMENT HERE.
THEN, JUST A COUPLE OF WEEKS
AGO, ISRAELI PRESIDENT BENJAMIN
NETANYAHU CUT THROUGH THE RED
TAPE AND ORDERED HIS GOVERNMENT
TO TURN ON THE TAP.
SO NOW THEY'RE DIGGING, LAYING
PIPES TO CONNECT THE NEW
PALESTINIAN TOWN OF RAWABI TO
ISRAEL'S WATER CARRIER.
>> NOW WE'RE IN A REMOBILIZATION
MODE IF YOU WISH, SINCE WE GOT
THE GO-AHEAD AND WE'VE ALREADY
INFORMED THE RESIDENTS THAT THEY
CAN COME IN MAY AND RECEIVE, DO
THIS FINAL SETTLEMENT AND GET
THEIR APARTMENTS.
>> Reporter: THAT'S ABOUT ONE
YEAR LATE?
>> THAT'S ABOUT ONE YEAR LATE
NOW BECAUSE OF JUST THE WATER.
>> Reporter: AND AS FOR THE ABU
MADI FAMILY, WHEN WE CALLED THEM
BY PHONE, MAHER SAID HE'S
DESPERATE TO MOVE IN.
HIS APARTMENT IS FULLY FURNISHED
AND AS SOON AS THE WATER IS ON,
HE SAID HE'LL BE AMONG THE FIRST
GROUP OF FAMILIES TO MOVE IN.
THAT SHOULD BE BY JUNE, IF ALL
GOES ACCORDING TO THE NEW PLAN.
>> Sreenivasan: TAKE A VIDEO
TOUR OF WHAT RAWABI LOOKS LIKE
TODAY.
VISIT US ON FACEBOOK AT
FACEBOOK.COM/NEWSHOUR.
>> Sreenivasan: BEFORE WE LEAVE
YOU, A NEW REPORT SAYS A GIRL
BORN TODAY MIGHT NEVER SEE WAGE
EQUALITY IN HER LIFETIME,
DEPENDING ON WHERE SHE LIVES.
THE INSTITUTE FOR WOMEN'S POLICY
RESEARCH FOUND THAT WOMEN IN
FLORIDA COULD SEE PAY EQUITY
FIRST, BY 2038, WHILE WOMEN IN
WYOMING MIGHT BE THE LAST TO
CLOSE THE GAP IN 2159.
LAST YEAR, AMERICAN WOMEN EARNED
82 AND A HALF CENTS FOR EVERY
DOLLAR EARNED BY A MAN.
AND FINALLY, WHAT CAN THE NATION
LEARN FROM THE RECENT INCIDENT
AT THE UNIVERSITY OF OKLAHOMA?
ARE TODAY'S YOUNG ADULTS REALLY
MORE TOLERANT THAN THEIR PARENTS
AND GRANDPARENTS?
JOIN US AND SHARE YOUR OPINION
ON TWITTER THIS TUESDAY, MARCH
17, FROM ONE TO TWO P.M.
EASTERN.
USE #NEWSHOURCHATS TO FOLLOW THE
CONVERSATION AND JOIN IN.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN, THANKS FOR
WATCHING.